@chapter Installation

@menu
* Get source via Subversion or CVS::
* Compilation and installation::
@end menu

@c ============================================================================
@node Get source via Subversion or CVS, Compilation and installation
@section Get source via Subversion or CVS

The sources obtained via Subversion or CVS are "clean" source
in the sense that all files that can be generated automatically are removed.
So one need use Autotools to generate necessary files
before the source can be configured and compiled.
Thus one need to have @code{autoconf} and @code{automake}
installed in the system.
To generate those files, simply type:

@example
autoreconf -if
@end example

@c ============================================================================
@node Compilation and installation,  , Get source via Subversion or CVS
@section Compilation and installation

@uni usually ship as a source gzipped tarball.
After extract the content of the tarball,
the source should be configured to be prepared for compilation.
In most UNIX-like platform and POSIX compatiable environment like Cygwin,
such configuration is performed automatically
by the @code{configure} shell script.
To run it, merely type:

@example
./configure
@end example

There are many options can be set and tuned for the configuration.
To get the detail information about these options, type:

@example
./configure --help
@end example

Next, to compile the source, simply type:

@example
make
@end example

After the source is successfully compiled,
the final step is the install it into the system.
To do it, type:

@example
make install
@end example

