@node    Getting Start
@chapter Getting Start

@menu
* What is @venus{}::            
* Running @venus{}::            
* Basic Primitives::            
* Defining Dialects::           
@end menu

@c =============================================================================
@node    What is @venus{}
@section What is @venus{}
@venus{} is a nonstrict lazy programming language designed
to be a platform for building domain specific languages.
Distinct from those popular programming languages used today,
which provide well defined sets of primitives and syntax,
@venus{} provides no built-in syntax nor control structures,
and is indent to be a open platform on which programmers
(or meta programmers) to define their own @emph{dialects} of @venus{},
that are suitable for a specific domain of problems
or a group of audience.
@venus{} is indented to be small and minimal,
rather than full featured.

@c =============================================================================
@node    Running @venus{}
@section Running @venus{}
In any UNIX-like shell environment,
To run the @venus{} interpreter in interactive mode:

@example
venus
@end example

To run a program with the interpreter:

@example
venus @i{filename.vs}
@end example

To run a program with the interpreter,
and let the interpreter enter the interactive mode
after interpreting the file:

@example
venus -i @i{filename.vs}
@end example

Alternatively, one can put the following line
to the very beginning of the source file,
so that the system will let the interpreter to
interpret the source file automatically.

@example
#!@i{path_of_venus}
@end example

Of course, one need to make sure that the file is executable.

@c =============================================================================
@node    Basic Primitives
@section Basic Primitives

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Lambda expressions
In @venus{}, lambda expressions can be created by the @code{\} function.
For example the identity function can written as:

@example
(\x x)
@end example

To define a reverse application function:

@example
(\x(\y(y x)))
@end example

To define the flip application function:

@example
(\f(\x(\y(f y x))))
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Names
The first let us define a variable @code{x}:

@example
defmap "x" "Hello World!";
@end example

Now the value of the variable @code{x} will be
the string @code{Hello World!}.
And Then, we can ``redefine'' the variable,
and let it point to a new object:

@example
redef "x" 7;
@end example

Finally, when a name is no longer needed,
we can ``undefine'' the name by:

@example
undef "x";
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Using dictionary
Like a hash table (and usually implemented by a hash table)
a dictionary is an associative container that maps strings
to objects.
To create a dictionary, use the @code{dict_new} function.
The @code{dict_new} function take one argument
as the type of the newly created dictionary.

@example
defmap "x" (dict_new ANY);
@end example

Now we can put new values into the dictionary,
for example, we can set three keys,
``name'', ``version'', and ``release'':

@example
dict_set x "name"    "Venus";
dict_set x "version" 2;
dict_set x "release" 1;
@end example

And we can read these values back
by using the @code{dict_get} function

@example
defmap "pkg_name"    (dict_get x "name");
defmap "pkg_version" (dict_get x "version");
defmap "pkg_release" (dict_get x "release");
@end example

@c =============================================================================
@node    Defining Dialects
@section Defining Dialects
In previous section,
we have showed some frequently used primitives.
Probably, few people will be interested in @venus{}
if they are forced to use that kind of syntax ---
it is so poor in readability and writability.
However, bear in mind that the syntax of @venus{} is dynamic.
There are no built-in syntax nor control structures,
everything can be and have to be defined by programmers.
Almost everything, even the scanner
(where the source is processed before they are passed to the parser)
can be customized or even substitute by programmers.
Instead of being a complete programming language,
@venus{} is indend to be a platform on top of which
programmers can define their own ``dialects''
focused on a small set of problems or audience.
To have an idea of how such dialects can be defined,
goto the sample dialect chapters,
where we had defined a few tiny dialect ones.

